[Music]
so we're talking about
the gap between rich and poor
and uh you're welcome to call in oh
three four five six oh six oh nine seven
three should we change the tax system in
some way the way it works
let's talk now to gary stevenson who
joins us he's an economist and former
city trader who was one of the
signatories
uh of a group of rich people calling for
more tax so good morning to you gary
is the gap between rich and paul getting
wider
it definitely looks like it's expanding
this year especially if you look at the
time
richness out today so according to that
times richlist there's been a 600
billion pound increase
in the wealth of the top 250 people in
this country about
22 increase um that's pretty much
very similar to the entire amount of
money the government has spent
dealing with the korean virus crisis so
it's um yeah it's a huge amount of money
it's
something about 12 13 000 pounds per
dollar in this country that's the
increase in wealth of the super rich
and this increase in wealth these extra
billionaires
is this because of the pandemic i mean
has that heightened the problem
it's crazy to think about it but um it
is um in fact i wrote an article
around march last year saying that the
one of the big consequences we're going
to see in this crisis is a massive
increase of the wealth in the super rich
and that is the result of the way
that the government has dealt with this
crisis now there were times in the past
when the government used to deal with
crises by taxing the richest people in
our society
but what has happened here in this class
has been very different what the
government has done combined with us
with the central bank the bank of
england has simply printed a huge amount
of money they printed about 450
billion pounds and that money has
largely ended up with
richer and higher income people now
richer and higher income people
they tend to use their money to buy
assets like houses and stocks and shares
that pushes their prices up and who owns
the most houses on the most stocks and
shares
well it's super rich so because the
government has printed their way out of
this crisis or at least tried to
that has led to a massive increase in
the wealth of people who
have the most wealth which is of course
super wealthy and is this something
that has just happened or has this been
going on
i mean did the economic crash have any
effect on this
yeah well i mean i was a trader um in
2008 after 2008 crisis
and um i made my money by basically
betting that pretty much
exactly the same thing would happen
after 2008 crisis because
really this is deja vu all over again
for the government central bank because
back in 2008
they also attempted to deal with the
crisis by simply printing their way out
of it
the end result was a massive increase in
stock prices
and house prices so they've done it back
then
over 10 years ago now they tried to
print their way out and end up with the
richest and they're doing it again
so i'm predicting we're going to see a
very similar kind of recovery
after this crisis which is fantastic
increases in wealth for the richest
and not very much for the rest of us
well yes what about the impact i mean i
i'm describing this as a problem but is
it a problem if you have a lot of super
rich
as long as that wealth kind of spreads
out to others as well
you know what that is that is a really
important question actually and that is
something which i think a lot about
someone which i'll talk a lot about
because i think it's really important
for
ordinary people that are people
listening to the show to understand
that when the super rich get rich that's
not just an abstract number you know
that's houses that's buildings that's
land of natural resources
and it's the natural resources and the
buildings and houses that the rest of us
need
now if they have a huge amount of money
then that means we need to pay them to
use it so it creates a cash flow from
ordinary people
to the richest which they then use to
push up house prices
and the end result which is what we've
seen over the last 20 years is a massive
decrease in affordability of housing
for ordinary people from ordinary
families and i talk about this a lot and
i've explained very clearly actually how
this works on my
youtube garry's economics on a video
called what is wealth so people want to
understand exactly
how the increasing wealth and the riches
is damaging ordinary people by making
houses that's affordable i think we'll
check that video
well i will certainly have a look at
that i'm sure people will
will do that i mean so you're saying
there's a direct link
between more billionaires and and the
the problem with housing
clive i'm not just saying it i've been
better on it for 12 years and i've made
millions of pounds doing it
we allow all of the money to go to the
super rich the fact is
super rich people if you give them more
money they don't spend it they use that
money to buy assets
assets like houses like the rest of us
that the rest of us need
so really it makes sense if you give
money to ordinary people they're going
to spend it that's going to go back into
the economy that's going to drive wages
up
if you give it to the super rich they're
going to buy assets and it's going to
make
housing less affordable so ultimately if
the money goes to the richest
instead of the rest of us what that
means is house prices up
wages down and that means unfortunately
a bleak future
for ordinary people so i really think we
need to do something about this uh what
do you think we should do about this
there's a lot of talk about a wealth tax
but that can mean a lot of things
what's your proposal yeah i mean
let's look at the figures here clive
right the government has increased its
debt by 450 billion pounds
during this crisis and 250 individuals
have increased their wealth by 600
billion pounds
and at the same time how are we thinking
of dealing with this crisis well we're
looking at taxing
ordinary people like you and me clients
well i think the 250
richest people in this country they
shouldn't be profiting from a crisis
when ordinary people have to pay for it
we really have to look at ways
to get these super rich to pay but of
course i understand we need to be very
careful we do this
these people they've got the best tax
accountants in the world working for
them
and they will try and dodge any taxes
that we bring in but we need to bring
taxes but when we do it we need to make
sure that they're targeted well enough
so that the super rich have to pay them
and they don't end up getting screwed
just by
ordinary people like yourself but we're
talking about
often multinational companies aren't we
international
uh billionaires who if we come up with
something they'll just move somewhere
else
so it's really isn't it a global problem
yeah it's funny you say that guy because
just right now as we speak
there's a internationally coordinated
attempt driven by
biden president of the u.s to bring in a
minimum tax rate on corporations so that
corporations cannot compete countries
against one another
and germany italy france japan they've
all signed up for this along with the
usa
and it's being blocked by rishi sonak
regional experiment law
owns a multinational billion pound
corporation
christianity is blocking this from
happening so countries want to get
together to make the super rich pay tax
at the moment
richie said like a uk government
stopping that from happening so yes we
need international coordination
international corporation to make the
rich pay their taxes but at the moment
the uk government is stopping that from
happening rather than supporting it and
i think we need to turn around to risky
sunnah whose father
is a billionaire and ask him why are you
stopping corporations from paying their
fair share of tax
and have we ever had a tax system
where the extremely rich pay pay a large
amount of money
if you go and look back at the post-war
period 50 60 there were much much higher
rates attacks on the very richest in the
country and i think it's not a
coincidence that back then housing was
much much more affordable you know
in that period ordinary people you know
people working completely ordinary jobs
without degrees or anything
could afford housing especially if
they're willing to save up for a few
years so
if you go and look back at the 50s 60s
when taxation of the richest was much
more affordable
famously the beetle spoke about paying
95 tax
but if you go and look at that period
where we did tax the rich more
effectively housing was more affordable
and quality of life in many ways was
more affordable for ordinary people and
you know that's 50 years ago before the
event of the internet live
if we were to bring in a better tax
system now that hit the richest instead
of ordinary working people
we can have so much more quality of life
more affordable housing just a
phenomenally better economy than what we
have at the moment
but it isn't part of the housing issue
that we just haven't got enough houses
i mean if we built more houses then
surely they would be
more affordable well you know when i was
a trader clive um i worked in london for
a few years now transferred to tokyo and
toco's got 38 million people there
they've got a lot of houses and housing
not that much
more affordable i think really this is a
global problem the problem of housing
is a global problem you can see
unaffordable housing any major country
you go to in the world all the major
cities is happening
so it's not really a london specific
problem it's an international problem
and that's because international wealth
international
capital can cross borders freely these
super rich they can buy houses all over
the world
and if we build more they'll buy them so
really if you compare internationally
but places where housing is affordable
and the housing is not affordable
it's largely down to how i equal the
places if you go look at moscow or
mumbai or hong kong housing is even more
unaffordable than what it is here
if we don't do anything about inequality
i think we will move to a future like
that
the housing will be even less affordable
and that's going to mean ordinary
children from ordinary families
won't have houses to raise the kitchen
gary thank you very much that's gary
stevenson economist former city
trader and he signed a uh a document
calling for a some kind of wealth tax
what do you think how do we do we need
to
narrow the gap between rich and poor do
we just accept it's there
and what do we tax who do we tax to get
some of this money back that's been
spent
maybe you think we don't need to